Swift | On-disk encryption article (#582)
getditto/docs: docs/ios/experimental/on-disk-encryption.mdx

provided by the platform your app is running on. On Apple platforms,
specifically on iOS, there is a myriad of options at your disposal to
configure the security parameters tailored specifically to your app and
your use-case.

### Creating or Opening an Encrypted Ditto

To create a new Ditto store with on-disk encryption enabled, or open an
existing one, simply call the experimental `open()` method by passing it a
passphrase:

<SnippetGroup
  name='on-disk-encryption-open-with-passphrase'
/>

:::info
It's currently not possible to encrypt an existing unencrypted Ditto store. Nor
is it currently possible to change the passphrase for an already encrypted
Ditto store. The corresponding APIs are being developed at the moment.
:::

### Generating a Secure Passphrase

The recommended way to create a secure passphrase on Apple platforms is to use
[CryptoKit](https://developer.apple.com/documentation/cryptokit):

<SnippetGroup
  name='on-disk-encryption-generate-passphrase'
/>

This will generate a secure symmetric key with 256 bits (32 bytes) and convert
it into a passphrase string by encoding the key data using base64 encoding.

> 

Reviewer: It is important to call out that the security of the system depends on the entropy of this passphrase.  If it is generated from a low quality RNG or with too low entropy it can be guessed.  With the current wording a user might be tempted to do something like allow human memorable passphrase to seed the system.

Maybe add:

"Potential pitfall:  The security of the system depends on the entropy of this passphrase.  Don't use other sources or strategies to generate the passphrase without careful consideration with domain experts."

Author: Added the text as a "danger box".

data when it's stored to disk.

It's up to you to store and manage the passphrase using the security mechanisms
provided by the platform your app is running on. On Apple platforms,
specifically on iOS, there is a myriad of options at your disposal to
configure the security parameters tailored specifically to your app and
your use-case.

### Creating or Opening an Encrypted Ditto

To create a new Ditto store with on-disk encryption enabled, or open an
existing one, simply call the experimental `open()` method by passing it a
passphrase:

<SnippetGroup
  name='on-disk-encryption-open-with-passphrase'
/>

:::info
It's currently not possible to encrypt an existing unencrypted Ditto store. Nor
is it currently possible to change the passphrase for an already encrypted
Ditto store. The corresponding APIs are being developed at the moment.
:::

### Generating a Secure Passphrase

The recommended way to create a secure passphrase on Apple platforms is to use
[CryptoKit](https://developer.apple.com/documentation/cryptokit):

<SnippetGroup
  name='on-disk-encryption-generate-passphrase'
/>

This will generate a secure symmetric key with 256 bits (32 bytes) and convert

> it into a passphrase string by encoding the key data using base64 encoding.

Author: > Once created, Ditto generates a secure symmetric key with 256 bits (32 bytes), and then convert
it into a passphrase string by encoding the key data using base64 encoding.

@contenuto the original was referring to the code snippet and describing what it does. It's not Ditto that generates that symmetric key.

> it into a passphrase string by encoding the key data using base64 encoding.

Author: Okay, took most of this, just fixed the wrong part.

:::danger

> The security of the system depends on the confidentiality and entropy of this
> passphrase. Don't use other sources or strategies to generate the passphrase
> without careful consideration with domain experts. Do not log or display this
> passphrase at any time.
> :::

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Although not recommended, if you choose to use alternative sources or strategies to generate the passphrase for your encrypted data store, it is crucial to exercise caution and seek guidance from domain experts. The security of the system heavily relies on the confidentiality and entropy of the passphrase. It is important to ensure that the passphrase is sufficiently random, unique, and unpredictable to minimize the risk of unauthorized access or decryption. 
:::
```

Author: @stusmall could you review this particular suggestion?

Reviewer 3: "seek guidance from domain experts." sounds belittling to me personally

Author: Yep agreed. @stusmall any other way you'd want to phrase this? I'll just state the facts:

> The security of the system heavily relies on the confidentiality and entropy of
the passphrase. It is important to ensure that the passphrase is sufficiently
random, unique, and unpredictable to minimize the risk of unauthorized access or
decryption.

Reviewer 2: Updated my suggestion with the "seek guidance from domain experts" omitted.

### Adding the Passphrase to Keychain

> On Apple platforms, those passphrases should be stored in the system Keychain.
> You do that by first specifying a dictionary containing the attributes of the
> keychain item, including the passphrase as a `Data` object, plus a tag that
> uniquely identifies the item in the keychain:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To securely store passphrases in the system keychain, utilize a dictionary that includes various attributes of the keychain item by including the passphrase as a `Data` object, representing the encrypted passphrase, and a unique tag that identifies the item within the keychain. 

By leveraging the system keychain, you can take advantage of Apple's built-in security mechanisms and protection features to safeguard the confidentiality and integrity of your passphrases. 
```

<SnippetGroup
  name='on-disk-encryption-adding-passphrase-to-keychain-part-1'
/>

> You then add it to the keychain while handling the appropriate errors:

Reviewer 2: Next, add the passphrase to the keychain while handling the appropriate errors:

<SnippetGroup
  name='on-disk-encryption-adding-passphrase-to-keychain-part-2'
/>

### Retrieving the Passphrase from Keychain

> Once you have added the passphrase to the keychain, you can retrieve it by
> specifying a query, which is again a dictionary with the attributes we used to
> add the passphrase:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To retrieve a passphrase from the system keychain, specify a query using a dictionary that includes the attribute you previously used to add the passphrase, such as the unique tag assigned to the item.  
```

<SnippetGroup
  name='on-disk-encryption-retrieving-passphrase-from-keychain-part-1'
/>

> Then retrieve the keychain item containing the passphrase:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Once you've retrieved the passphrase, retrieve the keychain item containing the passphrase:
```

Author: > Once you've ~retrieved~ added the passphrase, retrieve the keychain item containing the passphrase:

@contenuto I think you meant "added" instead of "retrieved" here?

But in general, this one _feels_ a bit misleading to me. Sounds like you first add it, then retrieve it, which breaks the logic of the sentence (i.e. why adding then retrieving and not use directly). We need to express a bit more "distance" between adding (which typically happens once on first launch), and continuously retrieving on subsequent launches.

What I wanted to say here is: ""

Author: @contenuto so, I think this is the correct wording for this part:

> Once you've specified the query, retrieve the keychain item containing the
passphrase as a `Data` object:

But, I feel like it's quite repetitive, it's always of the form:

1. Do A
2. Once you've done A, do B
3. Once you've done B, do C
4. ...

I'm not sure about this redundancy. The engineer in me wants to just leave it out. (Or at the very least reword it in a way that it carries some kid of additional information).

<SnippetGroup
  name='on-disk-encryption-retrieving-passphrase-from-keychain-part-2'
/>

> And convert it back to a string:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Once you have retrieved the passphrase from the system keychain as a `Data` object, you can convert it back to a string using appropriate encoding: 
```

<SnippetGroup
  name='on-disk-encryption-retrieving-passphrase-from-keychain-part-3'
/>

### Advanced Usage

> Ditto is designed and optimized for reactive use: you set up live queries for
> data you are interested in, then react to the updates provided by the live
> query. This reactive nature leads to data being continuously read and written
> to disk. This, in turn, requires Ditto to hold the encryption passphrase (a
> derivative of that to be precise) in memory at all times.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Ditto's design and optimization revolve around its reactive nature. It allows you to set up live queries for the specific data you're interested in, enabling you to react to updates in real-time. However, due to the continuous reading and writing of data to disk in Ditto's reactive setup, it is necessary to keep the encryption passphrase, or a derivative of it, in memory at all times. 
```

Author: Not quite sure about this one, it has a bunch of little stumbling blocks. Will get back to it later.

Author: I've mostly kept it as it was. The suggestion changes the meaning and logical flow such that it doesn't fit the thought I wanted to express. But I'm not happy with my version either.

> However, some high-security use-cases prohobit holding the passphrase in memory
> at all times. Typically, those cases require the user to authenticate at
> certain times, usually via a device passcode or biometrics (TouchID, FaceID).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In certain high-security use cases, it may be necessary to restrict the storage of the encryption passphrase in memory at all times. Instead, these cases may require additional authentication measures at specific intervals, such as device passcode entry or biometric verification; for example, TouchID or FaceID), to access the passphrase when needed. 
```

Author: @contenuto sounds great, just the opening brace for the one after FaceID is missing or the one after FaceID is a left-over?

Author: Removed the closing brace and taken as-is.

> To implement such use-cases with Ditto's on-disk encryption, you'll have to:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To implement such a high-security use case with Ditto's on-disk encryption, do the following:
```

> 1. Obtain the passphrase (authenticating via passcode, TouchID, or FaceID)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
1. Obtain the passphrase by authenticating yourself using a passcode, TouchID, or FaceID.
```

> 2. Open the Ditto store with it, set up live queries

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
2. Once obtained, use the passphrase to open the Ditto store and set up live queries.
```

> 3. React to live-queries, update data, etc.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
3. React to live queries, update data, and so on.
```

> 4. Close the Ditto store (stopping all live queries)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
4. Close the Ditto store by stopping all live queries.
```

Author: This one is a bit tricky: not all platforms offer to close Ditto, some rely on Ditto getting out of scope, and it's a best practice to stop all live queries and subscriptions. Will get back to it later.

> 5. Pause, no passphrase in memory (and no live queries)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
5. During the app's _paused_ state, where there is no passphrase in memory and no live queries, the data encrypted with the passphrase remain inaccessible and encrypted. As the app is not actively processing or interacting with the data during this time, the passphrase is not required or stored in memory.
```

Author: Same, I think we'll have to completely rethink and reword this whole section. I realize how it assumes a lot of implicit knowledge that customers won't have.

Author: I've just shortened this down to:

> Pause, no passphrase in memory.

I think the rest is just a distraction and a rehashing of what was said before.

> 6. Start over with step 1

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
6. Repeat step 1.
```

Author: There is no period for the other list items, I'm assuming it's unintentional? Or should we add punctuation to the others, too?

```suggestion
6. Repeat step 1
```

> That "pause" is typically a time where the user does not interact with your app.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

Author: Probably duplicate of the next one, resolving.

> For example when the app is in background or the phone is closed.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

### SecureEnclave & Ditto

> If you store and manage the Ditto passphrases via the
> Keychain APIs on Apple platforms as described above, the passphrase is
> automatically protected by Apple's [SecureEnclave](https://support.apple.com/en-gb/guide/security/sec59b0b31ff/web)
> according to the security properties you specify and implement.
> 
> However, it is important to keep in mind that the passphrase is in-memory
> as long as the Ditto object using it lives in memory. Encryption itself is
> happening in software. Full hardware encryption as offered by the

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If you store and manage the Ditto passphrases by way of the Keychain API as previously described, the passphrase is automatically protected by the Apple-provided _Secure Enclave_. The _Secure Enclave_ is a dedicated hardware component that adds an extra layer of protection against unauthorized access. For more information, see the official documentation at _Apple Platform Security_ > "[Secure Enclave](https://support.apple.com/guide/security/secure-enclave-sec59b0b31ff/web)" topic.

While the passphrase is protected by the Secure Enclave, it's important to note that it remains in memory as long as the Ditto object using it is present in memory. This is because the encryption itself is performed in software, but the secure storage and handling of the passphrase are facilitated by the Secure Enclave.
```

> `SecureEnclave` is not supported at the moment.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Ditto does not currently support the full hardware encryption as offered by the `SecureEnclave`.
```

This should probably be a note at the very top of the topic.

Author: I think we'll have to ditch this part completely, not sure Marketing will want to point a finger at the shortcomings. Asked on Slack:

Author: Ditched this part as advised by the Slack council.

### Conclusion

> The experimental `open()` method allows you specify a passphrase which Ditto
> uses to encrypt the data it stores on disk.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
By using Ditto's experimental `open()` method, you can specify a passphrase for Ditto to use to encrypt the data each time it is stored to disk. 
```

> Managing those passphrases should
> be done via the security APIs offered by the platform Ditto is running on. Apple
> platforms offer very sophisticated [Keychain APIs](https://developer.apple.com/documentation/security/keychain_services?language=objc) for that, backed by the [SecureEnclave](https://support.apple.com/en-gb/guide/security/sec59b0b31ff/web).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
managing passphrases in a secure manner should be done using the security APIs provided by the platform on which Ditto is running. The Apple platform offers very sophisticated [Keychain APIs](https://developer.apple.com/documentation/security/keychain_services?language=objc) backed by the [SecureEnclave](https://support.apple.com/en-gb/guide/security/sec59b0b31ff/web).
```

> This way, you can take full advantage of those widely used, battle hardenened,
> and familiar APIs to protect the passphrase by all security options offered by
> those APIs, including authentication via biometrics. All that Ditto needs is
> that passphrase at creation time.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
By using the widely-used, battle-hardened security APIs provided by the platform, data is protected by Apple's extensive security options to protect the passphrase. The platform's security APIs, such as the Keychain APIs on Apple platforms, offer a range of security features and authentication mechanisms, including biometrics like Touch ID or Face ID.

When creating an instance, the passphrase is required. Once provided, Ditto securely stores and uses the passphrase for encryption and decryption. 
```

Author: The suggested first paragraph is a bit of a rehashing of the one before without referencing it, which was my intention (via the "this way"). Kind of a similar problem as with the ["once" pattern above](https://github.com/getditto/docs/pull/582#discussion_r1233806772). It's not the actual fact that is important, it's the "if you do the above, you should be good, we just need the passphrase."

Tried to rephrase this somehow with the style of the suggestion, but failed to put out anything better than what I already have. Keeping as-is for now, but @contenuto feel free to take another stab at it with the context info I gave.

Reviewer 2: I modified my edit a bit.

Reviewer 2: Thanks for explaining that to me.

Author: Hmmm, it just doesn't read well, too much repetition and doesn't convey my main point.

> By using Ditto's experimental `open()` method, you can specify a passphrase for
Ditto to use to encrypt the data each time it is stored to disk.
>
> Managing those passphrases in a secure manner should be done using the
security APIs provided by the platform on which Ditto is running. The Apple
platform offers very sophisticated [Keychain APIs](https://developer.apple.com/documentation/security/keychain_services?language=objc) backed by the [SecureEnclave](https://support.apple.com/en-gb/guide/security/sec59b0b31ff/web).
>
> By using the widely-used, battle-hardened security APIs provided by the Apple
platform, data is protected by Apple's extensive security options to protect
the passphrase. When creating a new instance, provide Ditto with the
passphrase. Once provided, Ditto securely uses the passphrase for
encryption and decryption.

convert it into a passphrase string by encoding the key data using base64
encoding:

<SnippetGroup
  name='on-disk-encryption-generate-passphrase'
/>

:::danger
Although not recommended, if you choose to use alternative sources or
strategies to generate the passphrase for your encrypted data store, it is
crucial to exercise caution; the security of the system heavily relies on the
confidentiality and entropy of the passphrase. It is important to ensure that
the passphrase is sufficiently random, unique, and unpredictable to minimize
the risk of unauthorized access or decryption.
:::

### Adding the Passphrase to Keychain

By leveraging the system keychain, you can take advantage of Apple's built-in
security mechanisms and protection features to safeguard the confidentiality
and integrity of your passphrases.

To securely store passphrases in the system keychain, utilize a dictionary that
includes various attributes of the keychain item by including the passphrase as
a `Data` object, representing the encrypted passphrase, and a unique tag that
identifies the item within the keychain:

<SnippetGroup
  name='on-disk-encryption-adding-passphrase-to-keychain-part-1'
/>

> Next, add the passphrase to the keychain while handling the appropriate errors:

Reviewer 4: `Nitpick:`  
I suggest the line,  
```Next, add the passphrase to the keychain while handling the appropriate errors:```  
be rephrased as something similar to  
```Next, add the passphrase to the keychain while appropriately handling errors:```

Author: ```suggestion
Next, add the passphrase to the keychain while appropriately handling errors:
```

Author: Sounds good, done. 👍

Security_ > "[Secure
Enclave](https://support.apple.com/guide/security/secure-enclave-sec59b0b31ff/we
b)" topic.

### Implementation Details

The secure passphrase is used as a seed to derive all other file encryption keys in the system.  This is why it is so crucial to make sure it is generated and managed securely.

Internally, we have two general classes of data that gets persisted to disk.  We have a file based storage mechanism called blob storage and multiple interconnected sqlite databases.  All sqlite data is encrypted using sqlcipher.
[It is best to refer to their design documentation for any questions about the implementation](https://www.zetetic.net/sqlcipher/design/).  The passphrase passed in to the Ditto intializer is then passed to sqlcipher via the key pragma.

The blob storage API is backed by [AES-GCM-256](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Galois/Counter_Mode) encrypted files.  For each instance of a blob storage a new intialization vector(IV) is generated and stored on disk.  This IV is passed into (HKDF)[https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/HKDF] along with the passphrase to generate the AES key.  One blob storage instance can contain multiple different

> files.  Each file is split into blocks 4096 bit blocks (including metadata) that are individually encrypted.  Each block uses the real filename, the block number, block size and encryption scheme version as part of the associated data passed to AES-GCM.  This allows the 

Reviewer 4: Is the word `blocks` in the following sentence repeated inadvertently?  
```Each file is split into blocks 4096 bit blocks (including metadata)```

Reviewer: Good catch.  That is.

require additional authentication measures at specific intervals, such as
device passcode entry or biometric verification; for example, TouchID or
FaceID, to access the passphrase when needed.

To implement such a high-security use case with Ditto's on-disk encryption, do
the following:

1. Obtain the passphrase by authenticating yourself using a passcode, TouchID, or FaceID.
2. Once obtained, use the passphrase to open the Ditto store and set up live queries.
3. React to live queries, update data, and so on.
4. Close Ditto by letting it go out of scope.
5. Pause, no passphrase in memory.
6. Repeat step 1.

### SecureEnclave & Ditto

If you store and manage the Ditto passphrases by way of the Keychain API as
previously described, the passphrase is automatically protected by the
Apple-provided _Secure Enclave_. The _Secure Enclave_ is a dedicated hardware
component that adds an extra layer of protection against unauthorized access.
For more information, see the official documentation at _Apple Platform
Security_ > "[Secure
Enclave](https://support.apple.com/guide/security/secure-enclave-sec59b0b31ff/we
b)" topic.

> ### Internal Implementation

Author: How about just:

```suggestion
### Internals
```

Or:

```suggestion
### Implementation Details
```

> It can be valuable to know a little bit about what this is doing under the hood.  The secure passphrase is used as a seed to derive all other file encryption keys in the system.  This is why it is so crucial to make sure it is generated and managed securely.

Author: I'd remove the first sentence, especially the "a little bit" part is too loosy goosy.

```suggestion
The secure passphrase is used as a seed to derive all other file encryption keys in the system.  This is why it is so crucial to make sure it is generated and managed securely.
```

> Internally, we have two general classes of data that gets persisted to disk.  We have a file based storage mechanism called blob storage and sqlite databases.  All sqlite data is encrypted using sqlcipher.

Author: ```suggestion
Internally, we have two general classes of data that gets persisted to disk.  We have a file based storage mechanism called blob storage and multiple interconnected sqlite databases.  All sqlite data is encrypted using sqlcipher.
```

[It is best to refer to their design documentation for any questions about the implementation](https://www.zetetic.net/sqlcipher/design/).  The passphrase passed in to the Ditto intializer is then passed to sqlcipher via the key pragma.

> The blob storage API is backed by AES-GCM-256 encrypted files.  For each instance of a blob storage a new IV is generated and stored on disk.  This IV is passed into HKDF along with the passphrase to generate the AES key.  One blob storage instance can contain multiple different

Author: Let's either describe what IV & HKDF is, or link out to some article (Wikipedia?).

Reviewer: Updated with a definition of IV before used and a link to HKDF's wikipedia page which includes more details on what IVs and the role of this primative.

> The blob storage API is backed by AES-GCM-256 encrypted files.  For each instance of a blob storage a new IV is generated and stored on disk.  This IV is passed into HKDF along with the passphrase to generate the AES key.  One blob storage instance can contain multiple different

Reviewer: Will do.  I've updated with a link to wikipedia for this

files.  Each file is split into blocks 4096 bit blocks (including metadata) that are individually encrypted.  Each block uses the real filename, the block number, block size and encryption scheme version as part of the associated data passed to AES-GCM.  This allows the 
implementation to detect an adversary attempting to edit, reorder, swap or otherwise manipulate blocks, their data or the unecrypted headers around them.   Each of these files is capable of random access reads and writes.  When an IO operation happens 
the effected blocks are read from disk, decrypted, updated, a new IV block is generated and the block is reencrypted and written out.  

> Filenames in the blobstorage can contain valuable information about their contents.  Because of this every filename is replaced with a randomly generated nonce and the translation is stored in an encrypted store at the root of the blob storage directory.

Author: Nit: above, we say "blob storage", here we say "blobstorage".

Reviewer: Great catch

> The secure passphrase is used as a seed to derive all other file encryption keys in the system.  This is why it is so crucial to make sure it is generated and managed securely.
> 
> Internally, we have two general classes of data that gets persisted to disk.  We have a file based storage mechanism called blob storage and multiple interconnected sqlite databases.  All sqlite data is encrypted using sqlcipher.
> [It is best to refer to their design documentation for any questions about the implementation](https://www.zetetic.net/sqlcipher/design/).  The passphrase passed in to the Ditto intializer is then passed to sqlcipher via the key pragma.
> 
> 
> The blob storage API is backed by [AES-GCM-256](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Galois/Counter_Mode) encrypted files.  For each instance of a blob storage a new intialization vector(IV) is generated and stored on disk.  This IV is passed into (HKDF)[https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/HKDF] along with the passphrase to generate the AES key.  One blob storage instance can contain multiple different
> files.  Each file is split into blocks 4096 bit blocks (including metadata) that are individually encrypted.  Each block uses the real filename, the block number, block size and encryption scheme version as part of the associated data passed to AES-GCM.  This allows the 
> implementation to detect an adversary attempting to edit, reorder, swap or otherwise manipulate blocks, their data or the unecrypted headers around them.   Each of these files is capable of random access reads and writes.  When an IO operation happens 
> the effected blocks are read from disk, decrypted, updated, a new IV is generated and the block is reencrypted and written out.
> 
> Filenames in the blob storage can contain valuable information about their contents.  Because of this every filename is replaced with a randomly generated nonce and the translation is stored in an encrypted store at the root of the blob storage directory.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Ditto uses the secure passphrase as a seed for deriving all other file encryption keys in the on-disk encryption system; therefore, you must prioritize passphrase security to uphold overall security of the Ditto system.   

Ditto's process of data persistence for storing data to disk consists of two main classes:

- _Blob Storage_ — A file-based storage mechanism. 

- Multiple interconnected SQLite databases encrypted using _SQLCipher_ — Maintained by Zetetic, SQLCipher is an open-source security extension designed to secure stored data by encrypting the entire SQLite database file. For information on SQLCipher, see Zetetic's official documentation: SQLCipher > [Design](https://www.zetetic.net/sqlcipher/design/).  

Using the Blob Storage API, you can store multiple distinct files in a single Ditto instance. Once invoked, each file is fragmented into 4096-bit blocks (including metadata) and then encrypted. 

For every instance of blob storage you store, Ditto creates and stores a new initialization vector (IV) on disk, and then, using a key pragma statement, passes it along with the passphrase, into a Hash-based Message Authentication Code (HKDF) [https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/HKDF] function. Once received, HKDF generates and returns to Ditto an access key based on the Advanced Encryption Standard (AES) Galois/Counter Mode (GCM) algorithm. For more information about AES-GCM, see the [Galois/Counter Mode Wikipedia article](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Galois/Counter_Mode).

Since each encrypted 4096-bit block of blob storage data passed in the HKDF function is associated with a real filename, block number, block size, and encryption scheme version, the implementation automatically detects any bad actors attempting to edit, reorder, swap, or otherwise manipulate blocks, their data, or the unencrypted headers around them. 

In Ditto's blob storage system, each individual file is designed to support random access reads and writes. When an input-output (IO) operation occurs, involving the modification of specific blocks within a file, the following steps occur:

1. The blocks are read from disk.
2. The blocks are decrypted.
3. The blocks are updated with any changes.
4. The new IV is generated.
5. The blocks are re-encrypted.
6. The blocks are securely written back to disk.

To protect the valuable information contained in filenames within the blob storage, Ditto replaces each filename with a randomly generated nonce. Once generated, Ditto stores the translation information that associates the file's original filename with its corresponding nounce in an encrypted store located at the root of the blob storage directory.
```

Author: Changes sound great to me from a layman's perspective, @stusmall could take a look?

Reviewer 4: For the following line,  
```In Ditto's blob storage system, each individual file is designed to support random access reads and writes.```  
would it be more accurate to say,  
```The Ditto blob storage system is designed to support random access reads and writes on each individual file.```?

Reviewer: > Using the Blob Storage API, you can store multiple distinct files in a single Ditto instance. Once invoked, each file is fragmented into 4096-bit blocks (including metadata) and then encrypted. 

> For every instance of blob storage you store, Ditto creates

The users don't actually have access to this API.  It is just one of the types of storage used internally.  Normally an end user wouldn't be made aware that it even exists.  It is only brought to their attention because of the different implementations.

> Since each encrypted 4096-bit block of blob storage data passed in the HKDF function is associated [...]

In the original version "associated data" is a technical term. It is one of the inputs to AES-GCM.  "Associated data" is data that isn't necessarily confidential but related to the data that being encrypted that is used to ensure integrity.  For example we use block number as part of it.  This isn't a secret, but if someone tries to move something encrypted with "block 1" in the associated data to a difference place in the file then decryption will fail.  Also HKDF isn't involved at this point.

> In Ditto's blob storage system, each individual file is designed to support random access reads and writes. When an input-output (IO) operation occurs, involving the modification of specific blocks within a file, the following steps occur:

This makes sense to break out into a bullet list like this but if we do we should make it clear these actions are done individually for each block.  So it would be 

For each block the following steps occur:
1. The block is read from disk.
2. The block is decrypted.
3. The block is updated with any changes.
4. The new IV is generated.
5. The block is re-encrypted.
6. The block is securely written back to disk.

It seems like a small insignificant change, but if step 4 applies the same IV to all blocks then encryption can be defeated.

@contenuto  I'm sorry it's taken so long to get back with feedback on these changes.  I've been OOO for the last week.  If you'd like we can set up a meeting and work through some copy.  It might go quicker since a lot of the language is very nuanced.

Reviewer 5: @stusmall contenuto is also out and then has busy week coming up with the new documentation site; i wonder if you'd be able to make the necessary changes for technical correctness and then we can do another pass later if necessary in an iterative fashion perhaps next week? It's cheap to update it later for clarity if needed.

Author: Green lights from my side for all the pieces I've contributed. @stusmall feel free to merge right away once you are satisfied with your part. And I support @okdistribute's suggestion of merging _something_ that's correct, then iterate on the wording if need be.

---
title: 'On-Disk Encryption'
---

import SnippetGroup from '@site/src/components/SnippetGroup';

:::danger
*The Ditto on-disk encryption API is currently **Experimental** and should not
be used in production scenarios*
:::

The Ditto on-disk encryption feature allows you to secure your Ditto data by
passing a passphrase at construction time, which Ditto then uses to encrypt the
data when it's stored to disk.

It's up to you to store and manage the passphrase using the security mechanisms
provided by the platform your app is running on. On Apple platforms,
specifically on iOS, there is a myriad of options at your disposal to
configure the security parameters tailored specifically to your app and
your use-case.

### Creating or Opening an Encrypted Ditto

To create a new Ditto store with on-disk encryption enabled, or open an
existing one, simply call the experimental `open()` method by passing it a
passphrase:

``` Swift
let passphrase = "foo-123" // Generate a secure passphrase, see below.

let ditto: Ditto
do {

>     ditto = DittoExperimental.open(..., passphrase: passphrase)

Author: Sure, I was going to do that (and move to tests as snippet(s)). It's a "shitty draft" (== brain dump) atm, I'll ping you when it's ready for review. 👍

>     ditto = DittoExperimental.open(..., passphrase: passphrase)

Author: Done, snippets can be found on this PR: https://github.com/getditto/ditto/pull/8785.
